# Topic P - Secure Cryptographic Interface between the Wallet Instance and WSCA

Version 1.0, updated 14 Oct. 2025

[Link to GitHub discussion](https://github.com/eu-digital-identity-wallet/eudi-doc-architecture-and-reference-framework/discussions/578)

## 1. Introduction

### 1.1 Discussion Paper topic description

This document is the Discussion Paper for European Digital Identity Cooperation Group regarding
Topic P - Secure Cryptographic Interface between the Wallet Instance and WSCA

The ARF Development Plan [ARF_DevPlan] describes this Topic as follows:

The need for harmonization of this interface needs to be discussed. If the WSCA is 
delivered by the Wallet Provider, the situation is different than when the WSCA is delivered by 
the WSCD provider.


## 1.2 Key words

This document uses the capitalised key words 'SHALL', 'SHOULD' and 'MAY' as
specified in RFC 2119, i.e., to indicate requirements, recommendations and
options specified in this document.

In addition, 'must' (non-capitalised) is used to indicate an external
constraint, for instance a self-evident necessity or a requirement that is
mandated by an external document. The word 'can' indicates a capability, whereas
other words, such as 'will' and 'is' or 'are' are intended as statements of
fact.

## 1.3 Document structure

This document is structured as follows:
- Section 2 presents definition and existing High Level Requirements related to
topic P
- Section 3 discusses existing technologies
- Section 4 presents the additions and changes that will be made to the ARF as 
a result of discussing this topic with Member States.

## 2. Definitions,  and existing High Level Requirements 
Commission implementing regulation 2024/2979 defines Wallet Secure Cryptographic 
Application (WSCA) as follows:

> 'wallet secure cryptographic application' means an application that 
manages critical assets by being linked to and using the cryptographic 
and non-cryptographic functions provided by the wallet secure cryptographic 
device;

Furthermore, Article 5 of the same CIR sets the following requirements with respect to
WSCA

1. Wallet providers shall ensure that wallet secure cryptographic applications:

    (a) perform wallet cryptographic operations involving critical assets other 
    than those needed for the wallet unit to authenticate the wallet user only 
    in cases where those applications have successfully authenticated wallet users;

    (b) where they authenticate wallet users in the context of performing 
    electronic identification at assurance level high; perform authentication of 
    wallet users, in accordance with, the requirements for the characteristics 
    and design of electronic identification means at assurance level high, as 
    set out in Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1502;

    (c) are able to securely generate new cryptographic keys;

    (d) are able to perform secure erasure of critical assets;

    (e) are able to generate a proof of possession of private keys;

    (f) protect the private keys generated by those wallet secure cryptographic 
    applications during the existence of the keys;

    (g) comply with the requirements for the characteristics and design of 
    electronic identification means at assurance level high, as set out in 
    Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1502;

    (h) are the only components able to execute wallet cryptographic operations 
    and any other operation with critical assets in the context of performing 
    electronic identification at assurance level high.

2.   Where wallet providers decide to provide a wallet secure cryptographic 
application to an embedded secure element these wallet providers shall base 
their technical solution on the technical specifications listed in Annex I or 
on other equivalent technical specifications.

According to the ARF 

> Wallet Secure Cryptographic Application (WSCA) (is) an application that manages 
critical assets by being linked to and using the cryptographic and non-cryptographic 
functions provided by the Wallet Secure Cryptographic Device. Different types of 
WSCD generally use different types of WSCA. For example, if the WSCD is a remote 
HSM, the WSCA may be (but does not have to be) a dedicated firmware module. If the
WSCD is a external smartcard or an internal e-SIM or embedded Secure Element, 
the WSCA takes the form of a dedicated JavaCard applet running on the e-SIM or SE. 
If the WSCD is a local native WSCD, the WSCD is integrated into the OS of the User device. 
The WSCA interfaces directly with the Wallet Instance

In accordance with the High-Level Requirements outlined in Annex 2 of the ARF, the Wallet 
Secure Cryptographic Application (WSCA) shall provide the following functionalities to the 
Wallet Instance:

- A WSCA SHALL enable operations that enable the cryptographic device binding between a WSCA/WSCD
and a PID or attestation [OIA_02]
- A WSCA SHALL provide functionality that enables the Wallet Instance to determine 
whether the User has been successfully authenticated before allowing the User to provide 
or withhold consent for the release of any attributes [RPA_08, WIAM_14, WIAM_17].
- A WSCA SHALL provide functionalities that enable the Wallet Instance to generate a 
Wallet Unit Attestation (WUA) in accordance with the specifications defined in Topic 9 [WUA_01].
- A WSCA SHALL provide information that enable a Wallet Instance to determine if
the WSCA complies with the requirements of a PID Provider or Attestation Provider regarding 
User authentication and key storage [WUA_05].
- A WSCA SHOULD provide an interface allowing Wallet Instances to request a Cryptographic 
Binding of Attestations, which SHALL prove that the WSCA manages two or more private keys, 
paired with two or more public keys provided to it by the Wallet Unit [ACP_01].
- A WSCA SHALL provide the Wallet Instance with information indicating whether the export 
of a private key is supported [WUA_16].
- A WSCA SHALL provide functionalites for generating new key pairs [ISSU_12b, WIAM_18].
- A WSCA SHALL provide the Wallet Instance with storage capabilities for storing information 
required to authenticate using a Pseudonym [PA_14].
- A WSCA SHALL provide the Wallet Instance with information that can be used for Wallet
Unit activation [WIAM_05].
- A WSCA SHALL enforce isolation mechanisms that ensure a Wallet Unit can access only 
the cryptographic keys associated with that specific Wallet Unit, in case the WSCA contains keys 
related to multiple Wallet Units [WIAM_09]. 
- A WSCA SHALL provide the Wallet Instance with functionalites to securly destroy 
generated cryptographic keys and sensitive data [WIAM_13, WIAM_21, PAD_04, PAD_06]. 
- A WSCA/WSCD SHALL be able to prove possession of the private key corresponding to a 
 public key on request of a Wallet Instance, for example by signing a challenge with that 
 private key [WIAM_19].



## 3. Existing technologies
This section presents a number of technologies that potentially can be used to 
implement a WSCA. It is important to clarify that the ARF does not endorse any 
specific technology. The Wallet Provider must ensure that its implementation of 
the WSCA and WSCD in combination can be certified for security. Moreover, it is 
possible that the Wallet Provider may need to develop some bespoke components to 
be able to fulfill all requirements for a WSCA in the ARF and the CIRs. For 
example, if the WSCD is a smart card, the Wallet Provider may develop a 
dedicated JavaCard applet that runs on the WSCD and augments the native OS of 
the smart card with additional functionalities. If so, the security of this 
JavaCard applet needs to be considered during certification of the Wallet 
Solution, whereas the OS of the WSCD itself (which is not provided by the Wallet 
Provider) may be covered under an assumption regarding its resistance against 
attackers with high attack potential, in accordance with CIR 2024/2981, Annex 
IV, paragraph 3(3). Furthermore, in accordance with CIR 2024/2981 "every 
architecture and implementation of wallets" shall properly address the security
and privacy risks set in Annex I of CIR 2024/2981. 

In mobile devices, the Wallet Secure Cryptographic Device (WSCD) is often embedded within 
the device hardware. The WSCA, in this case is platform-dependent and acts as the interface 
layer between the Wallet Instance and the secure capabilities of the device.

For example, on Android devices, the WSCA may be implemented as part of the Android
Keystore system, which interfaces with hardware-backed security modules such as StrongBox 
or TEE-backed Keymaster. For more details, see the Android documentation:

- [Android Keystore System](https://developer.android.com/training/articles/keystore)
- [Hardware-backed Keystore](https://source.android.com/docs/security/features/keystore)

Similarly, on Apple iOS devices, the WSCA functionality is typically exposed through the 
Secure Enclave, accessed via platform APIs such as Keychain Services and CryptoKit. 
For more details, see the Apple documentation:

- [Keychain Services](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/keychain_services)
- [CryptoKit](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/cryptokit)
- [Secure Enclave](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/protecting-keys-with-the-secure-enclave)

In some cases WSCD is implemented as an eSIM or a Secure Element (SE) that supports JavaCard technology. 
In these cases, the WSCA can be deployed as a JavaCard applet running directly on the eSIM or SE. 
JavaCard is a lightweight, Java-based platform designed to run on resource-constrained secure elements, 
providing cryptographic services, secure storage, and access control in a tamper-resistant environment.

GlobalPlatform maintains the **Open Mobile API** specification, which defines a standardized interface that 
enables mobile applications to access Secure Elements (SEs) on the device—such as embedded Secure Elements (eSE), 
UICCs (SIM cards), or eSIMs. The Open Mobile API was originally defined by the SIMalliance (now part of 
GlobalPlatform) and has been implemented in some Android devices, either directly in the Android OS or 
through vendor-specific middleware. More details can be found here:

- [GlobalPlatform Open Mobile API Specification](https://globalplatform.org/specs-library/open-mobile-api-specification/)

When WSCD functionality is provided by external HSMs, PKCS#11 can be considered.
The PKCS#11 specification, also known as Cryptoki, defines a standard interface for cryptographic 
okens such as hardware security modules (HSMs), smartcards, and other secure key containers. 
It enables applications to perform operations such as key generation, digital signing, 
encryption, and decryption using keys stored in a secure device, without exposing the 
keys to application memory. 

The PKCS#11 standard is maintained by the OASIS consortium. More details can be found here:

- [PKCS#11 Current Version (v3.1)](https://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-spec/v3.1/os/pkcs11-spec-v3.1-os.html)

The Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP) is an open standard that can be used 
for interacting with remote HSMs. KMIP defines a protocol for communication between 
clients (e.g., applications or middleware) and key management servers (e.g., HSMs, key vaults), 
supporting operations such as key creation, retrieval, rotation, and deletion.
KMIP is  supported in enterprise-grade hardware security modules and software-based key managers. 
KMIP is maintained by the OASIS KMIP Technical Committee and the latest specifications are publicly available:

- [KMIP Specification v2.1 (OASIS)](https://docs.oasis-open.org/kmip/kmip-spec/v2.1/os/kmip-spec-v2.1-os.html)


## 4 Additions and changes to the ARF



### 4.1 High-Level Requirements to be added to Annex 2

No HRL needs to be added in Annex 2

### 4.2 High-Level Requirements to be changed

No HLR needs to be changed

### 4.3 Descriptions to be added to the ARF main document
Section 4.5 of the ARF about WSCD architecture types will be updated to refer to
Implementing Act 2024/2981, Annex IV, particularly to paragraph 3(3) which
states:

> When the WSCA is not provided by the wallet provider, national certification 
schemes shall formulate assumptions for this evaluation of the WSCA under 
which resistance against attackers with high attack potential in accordance 
with Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1502 [...]

Similarly, in section 4.5 it will be made clearer that WSCA and WSCD do not have
to be coupled. 

## 5 References

| Reference | Description |
| --- | --- |
| [ARF_DevPlan] | Architecture and Reference Framework Development plan 2025, European Commission, v0.91, final draft |
| [European Digital Identity Regulation] | Regulation (EU) 2024/1183 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 April 2024 amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 as regards establishing the European Digital Identity Framework |

